# .NET Debugging Demos Lab 6: Memory Leak

## Problem description

We have started getting out of memory exceptions on the buggy bits site
and we have been able to determine a scenario in which we think we are
leaking memory but we can't seem to figure out where the memory is
going.

The leak seems to be occurring on our ProductInfo page for example
https://localhost:44350/Products/Details/Bugspray and we can reproduce
it by stress testing.

It seems like it is leaking just a small bit every time but since it is
something that customers look at a lot and over time the process will
crash with an out of memory exception.

## Reproduce the issue and gather data

1.  Start the application and browse to the [[product details
    page]{.underline}](https://localhost:44350/Products/Details/Bugspray)

2.  Monitor the .net performance counters

3.  dotnet-counters monitor -n iisexpress

4.  Stress the application

5.  .\\tinyget.ps1 -url
    https://localhost:44350/Products/Details/Bugspray -numTimes 1000

6.  After tinyget has finished, capture a memory dump

7.  dotnet-dump collect -n iisexpress

> or with procdump

> procdump64.exe -ma iisexpress.exe

## Review the performance counters to figure out what we are leaking

1.  Compare the Working Set to GC Heap Size

    -   Do the numbers seem to match or do they diverge? Based on this,
        can you tell if the issue we are facing is a virtual bytes leak,
        a native leak or a .NET leak?

2.  Look at the Number of Assemblies Loaded counter

    -   Should this counter stay flat or is it ok for this counter to
        increase like this? What does it mean?

## Debug the memory dump

If there is a big discrepancy between Working Set and GC Heap Size, and
they don't seem to follow each other, we either have a **native leak**
which means that we have a native component that is leaking (in which
case debug diag would be the next step), or we have an assembly leak.

1.  Open the memory dump, load up the symbols and load sos.dll (see
    information and setup instructions for more info)

    -   What is the size of the memory dump (on disk)?

2.  Run !eeheap -gc and !dumpheap -stat

    -   What is the size of the .NET heap according to !eeheap -gc, why
        is it different from GC Heap Size?

> We saw from performance monitor that we appeared to be leaking
> assemblies, so the next step is to determine where these assemblies
> are created and why we are leaking them.

3.  Run !dumpdomain to look at the assemblies loaded in the process

    -   Which domain has most assemblies loaded? Note: this question
        makes more sense on a server where you have multiple sites
        running

    -   Are these dynamic assemblies or assemblies loaded from disk? (is
        there a path associated with them)

4.  Dump the module contents using !dumpmodule \<moduleaddress\> where
    module address is the address given right after Module Name on one
    or a few of the dynamic assemblies. eg. in the example below you
    would run !dumpmodule 00007ffcfe532d58

5.  Assembly: 0000025392f4b4f0 (Dynamic) \[\]

6.  ClassLoader: 000002539340E710

7.  Module Name

8.  00007ffcfe532d58 Dynamic Module

9.  Run dc \<MetaDataStart\> \<MetaDataEnd\> to dump out the metadata
    for the module and find out what is implemented in this dynamic
    assembly. eg. in the example below you would run dc 114d09e4
    114d09e4+0n4184

> **Note:** We use the start address + 0n4184 because the metadata is
> 4148 bytes and the 0n stands for decimal
>
> 0:000\> !dumpmodule 11b7e900
>
> Name: gyq9ceq2, Version=0.0.0.0, Culture=neutral, PublicKeyToken=null
>
> Attributes: PEFile
>
> Assembly: 158770d0
>
> LoaderHeap: 00000000
>
> TypeDefToMethodTableMap: 16e2a2c4
>
> TypeRefToMethodTableMap: 16e2a2dc
>
> MethodDefToDescMap: 16e2a33c
>
> FieldDefToDescMap: 16e2a3a8
>
> MemberRefToDescMap: 16e2a3d4
>
> FileReferencesMap: 16e2a4c4
>
> AssemblyReferencesMap: 16e2a4c8
>
> MetaData start address: 114d09e4 (4184 bytes)
>
> **Note:** If your assembly does not show MetaData start address - you
> have to take a bit of a leap with me and find out from the raw memory
> where the metadata starts - the example below is for a module at the
> address 00007ffcfe532d58
>
> 0:000\> dp 00007ffcfe532d58
>
> 00007ffc\`fe532d58 00007ffd\`5c570f88 00000253\`93187ffa
>
> 00007ffc\`fe532d68 00000253\`92f4b470 00000000\`00000000
>
> 00007ffc\`fe532d78 00000002\`00200831 00000000\`00000000
>
> 00007ffc\`fe532d88 00000253\`92f4b4f0 00000000\`26000000
>
> 00007ffc\`fe532d98 ffffffff\`ffffffff 00000000\`ffffffff
>
> 00007ffc\`fe532da8 00000000\`00000000 00000000\`00000000
>
> 00007ffc\`fe532db8 00000000\`020007d0 00000000\`c0000000
>
> 00007ffc\`fe532dc8 ffffffff\`ffffffff 00000000\`ffffffff
>
> Take the 2nd address 0000025393187ffa - this is where the metadata is
> stored, and print out the contents from there and 1000 bytes on
>
> dc 0000025393187ffa 0000025393187ffa+0n1000

-   What type of assembly was this? What is it used for? How is it
    generated?

## Putting it all together and determining the cause of the assembly leak

If we look at the [[documentation for
XmlSerializer]{.underline}](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.xml.serialization.xmlserializer?redirectedfrom=MSDN&view=net-5.0)
we get the following information about dynamically generated assemblies
related to XmlSerialization

**Dynamically Generated Assemblies** To increase performance, the XML
serialization infrastructure dynamically generates assemblies to
serialize and deserialize specified types. The infrastructure finds and
reuses those assemblies. This behavior occurs only when using the
following constructors:

-   XmlSerializer..::.XmlSerializer(Type)

-   XmlSerializer..::.XmlSerializer(Type, String)

If you use any of the other constructors, multiple versions of the same
assembly are generated and never unloaded, which results in a memory
leak and poor performance. The easiest solution is to use one of the
previously mentioned two constructors. Otherwise, you must cache the
assemblies in a Hashtable...

From this, and the fact that our performance logs and dump shows that we
are continuously generating new XML serialization assemblies we can
conclude that it is very likely that we are not using one of the
standard constructors. Search the project code for new XmlSerializer or
use reflector like in this example to determine where we are generating
these dynamic assemblies.

-   What method / line of code is causing the problem?

## Resolve the issue and rerun the test to verify the solution

1.  Resolve the issue by caching the XmlSerializer using the sample in
    the documentation for XmlSerializer.

2.  Rerun the test to verify that the assembly "leak" no longer exists.
