# .NET Debugging Demos Lab 1: Hang

This is the first in a series of about 10 labs on .NET debugging. The
lab will use a site called BuggyBits, and as the name suggests the bits
are extremely buggy.

**Note:** The questions in the labs are only meant as an aid when
troubleshooting the problem. I will moderate any comments containing
answers to these questions until I have released the lab review (about a
week after the original lab post in order to give everyone a shot at the
labs without answers)

Feel free to comment on the lab format good or bad so that I know what
works well and what doesn't for future labs.

Without further ado, here comes Lab 1

## Reproduce the problem

1.  Browse to Featured Products
    (https://localhost:44350/Products/Featured).

> This should take about 5 seconds to show, you can see the start time
> and execution time the bottom of the page.

2.  Open up 5 browsers, all browsing to this site and refresh them
    simultaneously

> Note the execution time for each of them and make sure that the start
> time is pretty much the same on all (otherwise you probably didn't run
> the reg file)

Questions:

-   What are the execution times?

-   What is the CPU usage of the w3wp.exe process when reproducing the
    problem? High or low CPU?

-   What are some potential reasons for a hang with these symptoms?

## Get a memory dump

1.  Start a command window and browse to your debuggers directory. Type
    the following command to prepare taking the dump but don't hit enter
    quite yet.

2.  procdump64.exe -ma iisexpress.exe

> or with dotnet-dump
>
> dotnet-dump -n iisexpress.exe

3.  Reproduce the problem either by browsing with 5 browsers as you did
    before or by stressing the site with tinyget with the following
    command line

4.  tinyget.ps1 -url
    https://localhost:44350/Products/Featured -numTimes 100

5.  Hit enter in the procdump/dotnet-dump command window to take the
    memory dump while the requests are still executing.

Questions:

-   What triggers the generation of the memory dump?

-   What permissions do you need to take a memory dump of a process?

-   What is the difference between running with -ma or without?

## Open the dump in Windbg

1.  Open windbg and open the memory dump (.dmp file) with File/Open
    Crash dump.

2.  Set up the symbol path (see Information and Setup Instructions for
    more info)

3.  Load sos (see Information and Setup Instructions for more info)

## Examine the stacks

1.  Examine the native call stacks

2.  \~\* kb 2000

3.  Examine the .net call stacks

4.  \~\* e !clrstack

Questions:

-   Do you see any patterns or recognize any of the call stacks that
    suggests a thread is waiting for a synchronization mechanism?

# Troubleshoot the hang

1.  Determine the ID of the thread owning the lock

2.  !syncblk

    -   What thread owns the lock?

    -   How many threads are waiting for the lock?

> Hint: MonitorHeld = 1 for each owner and 2 for each waiter.

3.  Pick one of the waiters (Hint: waiters will sit in AwareLock::Enter)
    and take a look at what it is doing.

4.  \~5s (move to thread 5, replace 5 with actual thread ID)

5.  kb 2000 (examine native stack)

6.  !clrstack (examine .net stack)

    -   In which .net function is it waiting for the lock?

7.  Determine what the owning thread is doing

8.  \~5s (move to thread 5, replace 5 with actual thread ID)

9.  kb 2000 (examine native stack)

10. !clrstack (examine .net stack)

    -   Why is it blocking?

11. Examine the code for .NET method owning the lock to verify your
    theory.
